Okay, let's piece all this together here.
So I gave you this data with a desire
to project what's gonna happen next.
Now if you think about the regression
approach, what we might have done is
we could have taken this data set and
we could have broken into pieces.
And we could have said, lets look at
your data from the first half or say
the first three years and try to predict
what you'll do in the second three years.
And we could run regression models.
We can use things like r and f, and
other measures if we had them available
to predict how many donations
you make in the second half.
And then we could take the results
of that regression and
make statements about
the next three years.
We can do that.
And if all we wanted to do was to make
statements about one period in time
we would do that.
And that might do absolutely just fine.
I would have no problem
with that whatsoever.
But what happens if we want to
make projections further out.
We don't want to limit
ourselves to any one period.
I wanna take all of that data,
all six years of that data for
each customer since they were acquired,
to make statements,
not just any one period, but
for the rest of eternity.
So, this is the contrast between
a standard regression model,
which again is spectacular,
if we wanna make statements at one period,
versus what I'm gonna
call a probability model.
To be able to tell more of a story about
what's happening below the surface
in order to be able to answer
questions over a longer horizon.
Perhaps at the expense of those immediate
short term horizon type questions.
So I wanna look a these zeroes and
ones and
tell a story about what's driving them.
In some sense, regression is about
using whatever explanatory variables
you have to tell that story.
It doesn't really let you
go below the surface of
the data that you have available.
Well that's what I wanna do.
I wanna suggest that there's some
behavioral mechanism, something that we
can't observe that's driving the yeses and
noes, that's driving the zeros and ones.
I want to think of some kind of
process that people are using
to determine whether to make a donation or
not in a given period of time.
So let me just think about
the simplest process of all.
In other words, in regression very
often it's gonna be complicated.
I'm gonna bring in marketing and the
economy and competition and demographics.
I wanna bring in as much
information as possible.
I wanna go to the opposite extreme.
I wanna bring in none of
that information at all.
Instead I'm gonna say that each
person's decision of whether or
not to make a donation
is gonna be a coin flip.
So let's just imagine,
heads I donate, tails I don't.
Now, do you think that people
are truly pulling out coins and
flipping them when it comes time to
making these kinds of decisions?
Probably not.
Almost surely not.
What are they doing instead?
Well, I don't know.
It's pretty complicated.
It's gonna be a function of many,
many, many different things.
Some of the things,
we can observe like market activity and
social media and
competition and demographics.
Yeah, some of that we can observe but
there's still so
many things that we can observe.
Just think about yourself when
you're making day to day decisions.
Sometimes it's gonna depend on, you ran
out of orange juice in the morning so
you had to run to the store and
you didn't plan to.
Or your kid was sick.
Or you just hired a new person at work.
There's so many factors out there that
drive our decisions in subtle but
powerful ways.
My view is that the decisions
that we make are as if random,
as if we're flipping a coin,
heads I do it, tails I don't.
Again, I am not saying that literally, but
it's kind of like if you're at the top of
a tall building and you're looking
at the people walking around.
They look like ants, right?
Not only because they're small,
but because they look so
random, like why is this person turning
left and why is that person turning right?
Well, in their mind, there's probably good
reasons for everything they're doing, but
we, as an outside observer,
can't see those reasons.
So rather than trying to say, well, let's
try to predict left or right as a function
of the temperature, the humidity,
the wind speed, you can't do it.
At some point,
the signal to noise ratio is so
low that people are acting as if random.
And so
I'm going all the way to that extreme,
I'm gonna build this as if random
model of customer behavior.
I'm gonna say that people
are flipping their coin,
heads they make the purchase or
donation, tails they don't.
But there's a catch, different
people are flipping different coins.
It's not a 50-50 coin for everybody.
Different people have different
kinds of propensities.
So one person might have a coin that
comes up heads 10% of the time.
One person might have a coin that
comes up heads 90% of the time.
And so
it doesn't mean that like clockwork,
one out of every ten opportunities
will happen as a purchase.
But it means that if I were to watch you
over a long period of time, about 10% or
90% of them would come up.
I don't necessarily even care that
much about the specific pattern.
I care more about just
the overall propensity.
If I'm gonna watch you in the long run,
I just wanna have a pretty good sense
about how many donations you're gonna
make in that long future period.
So I have this coin that's
gonna capture that.
And again, the real key is that
the coin varies across people.
That coin can vary across people
in lots of different ways.
You could think about lots of
different kinds of pictures
that might capture how the coins vary.
So if you look at this slide over here,
maybe that everyone has a fairly similar
coin, with just a few people being lower,
a few people being higher.
Or maybe most of the coins
are very headsy, that is,
people are inclined to donate.
Or maybe the coin is very tailsy and
most people are disinclined to donate.
Or maybe we get a U-shaped curve where
there's some people who are really
into it and some people who aren't.
There can be lots of different shapes!
And I'm not even gonna pick which one.
I'm gonna try to pick appropriate
statistical distributions
that can capture all
these different shapes.
So just having the ability to capture
how people differ in their coin flips,
in their purchasing propensities,
is gonna get me pretty far.
But wait, if you think about the Mary and
Charmila story,
it's not only knowing about the overall
propensity to make those donations, is it?
We also have to know something about,
is this person alive or not?
And that's why many of you voted for
Mary over Charmila, because you believe,
some of you, that Charmila, she had that
0 at the end there, she's probably gone.
And that means that we need a second coin.
And this bad boy over here,
this is the death coin.
Okay, this coin we flip every period,
big heavy coin.
When this coin comes up heads,
all that means is you'll live
to have another opportunity.
And then you can pull out your purchase
coin and flip it, heads I buy,
tails I don't.
But when this one comes up tails,
I'm gone and I'm gone for good.
Now, I'm not literally saying death,
and I hope you understand that, but
I'm saying that people just drop out of
purchasing certain kinds of products,
services, product categories.
Again, I don't know why.
You no longer have needs for
it, and so on, so
we have the quote unquote death coin,
I'm gonna flip this every period.
And again, when it comes up heads,
it doesn't tell me anything
about my actual behavior.
It just gives me the opportunity
to flip the other coin to
have some behavior happen.
But when this coin comes up tails,
I'm gone and I'm gone for good.
That's gonna be my whole story.
And in the same way that we're gonna allow
for differences among people in their buy
coin, the fancy word we
use is heterogeneity.
Just as we allow for heterogeneity on the
purchase rates, we're also gonna allow for
heterogeneity on the death rates.
So if you recall this
picture that I showed you,
that shows all the different kinds
of distributions about how many
people might have very high versus low
death propensities, same kinda thing here.
We're gonna pick statistical
distribution that's gonna capture just
the differences across people and just how
a death prone or how life prone they are.
And again I don't know,
even if you have a very death prone coin,
I don't know exactly
when you're gonna die.
You're flipping this
coin that's very tailsy,
it's pretty likely to come up tails,
but, you can get lucky and
go two or three, four, or
five periods without it happening.
It's all random.
It's all probabilistic.
And so I'm gonna have these two coins,
each person carrying different ones
that have different weight on
heads versus tails on buying and
heads versus tails on dying.
And that gives us what I like to
call a buy till you die model.
These are models that have been around
in marketing for close to 30 years now.
I didn't invent them myself, although I'm
happy to say I've helped popularize and
extend them, and we found that in
many many different kinds of context.
Whether it's purchasing,
whether it's participating in
different kinds of events.
A wide variety of
activities when people have
a repeated opportunity to
make something happen.
Whether it's transactions,
visits to websites,
filing insurance claims, and so on.
That these buy till you die models
are extremely powerful in their ability
to make pretty long range
projections about the buying and
the dying that we might see in the future.
Their ability to make statements about
the next period is maybe as good
as a regression model.
And honestly if your objective
is just to make statements about
the short term use regression models,
they’re the best.
But if your desire is to make
statements about the longer run,
then these kinds of models,
and other models like them.
I'm not endorsing any
one model specifically.
But I'm just talking about
the idea of looking at the data,
telling a story about the random processes
that are happening underneath it.
Tell that story, coin flips, spinning
wheels, whatever randomization you
might wanna use, tell the story about how
those propensities vary across people.
Tell a story about how those propensities
vary over time and then do the math.
I'm gonna skip all the math for you right
now, although it's not that hard, and
in a case like this implementing the model
isn't gonna be difficult at all.
If you're interested,
we'll post some links to papers and
technical notes that will let you learn
about the development of these models.
But let's take a break and then let's talk
about actually bringing the model to life
and what some of the results look like.